“Alright, bring numbers three and four to the preparation area.”

The technicians acknowledged the order, and began moving the massive tanks, accompanied by the soft whirring of the drive motors.

At the surgeon’s left, advanced imaging systems showed a slowly rotating view through Subject Three’s cranium. At his right, a surgical tray held the most advanced neural interface mesh currently available to non-military customers, and a selection of tools dramatically removed from their predecessors, but still recognizable in purpose.

There were no complications.

---

“Touch the green circle with your right pectoral fin, please.”

There was some hesitation, both in ‘left/right’ and which of the several spots on the seawall was green, but after a few long moments, Three gave the circle a hearty slap, earning a happy comment from the wetsuited examiner and an encouraging clicking from his podmates, gathered against the other side of a soft divider mesh.

“You’ve been making good progress, and there’s no indication of rejection in the implant integration. You should be able to link to a voice module in another six months.”

This earned more happy squeals from the pod, causing the examiner’s belt-carried vocoder to erupt in a minor cacophony as the already-integrated members began speaking up, each trying to talk over the others and earning a good-natured rude gesture from the examiner.

---

“… And the project is showing much more promise than previous attempts, with preliminary results indicating a 90-plus percent rate of successful language transducer integration. Speculative cause for the improvement in success rate is the inclusion of an entire pod at once, Orcas being highly social. The encouragement of podmates seems to be a major driving force for advancing individual mental acuity and language implant integration.

“We have seen dramatic increases in abstract thinking - or at least, demonstrable measures of same. If funding is maintained at current annual levels, the entire pod will be fitted with langage modules inside of three years, with all offspring able to handle the implants once they reach young adult growth.

"Unfortunately, we still can’t reliably interpret their own self-given names.”

This last comment earned a quiet round of chuckles from the various concerns represented in the audience, quickly subsiding. The presentation continued for a few more minutes, going into slightly more detail on potential revisions to the implant design, relevant to several of the audience members as component suppliers for implants or vocoders.

---

“You seem anxious, Researcher Jackson.”

Aaron Jackson blinked twice at the addressing, and put the pen he’d been clicking for the past several minutes down on the table with a firm slap. “You’re getting more perceptive, Three. And yes, I am anxious. Our budget is coming up for renewal in a few months, and some of the major backers are getting jumpy for the long-term aspects of the project.”

“Why are they not wanting to give you enough fish to continue? They inhale water?”

Jackson turned to lean on the water-access cul-de-sac wall, trailing his fingers in the water, distracted somewhat by the doubly-translated idioms. “Inhale…? oh. No, but I think they’re worried about the long-term viability of your pod, even though it’s growing at a comfortable rate. Even without the implants though, you can still understand us perfectly well. There’s a limit to what we can do with your organic voices yet, and that seems to be the biggest worry for the backers. They’re wanting to see human-level intelligence *and* speech from an un-augmented Orca-2, and I’m not sure that’s something we can deliver.”

Nosing up against the smooth tile and glass of the wall, Three rolled onto his side and tapped the wall with his pectoral fin, enough to make the seawater let in from the bay splash Jackson’s shirt sleeve. “It will work. The deep knows. The deep can carry your effort.”

Words to think about. Jackson found himself repeating them late that night, waiting for sleep to settle on him.

---

=Does he know?=

=I hinted to him.=

=But does he *know*?=

Sun Glinting Through Choppy Seas And Shining On The Backs Of Fish, known to the humans as ‘Three’, arrested his lazy roll in the water and looked at Safe Touches Of Mother In Kelp Fronds. =No. He does not know. He has enough to worry about with getting enough fish for his work.=

Safe Touches surfaced momentarily for air before replying. =He needs to know. The rest would not understand.=

=I will tell him within the next podcount of days, Safe Touches.=

=Good. You are the best with the dry words of all of us, even better than Slapping Tail Tied Up In Kelp Fronds, and she was the first.=

Sun Glinting turned away from Safe Touches for a moment, thinking, =I will try to get him to come out on a boat. Dry words carry farther than they sound.=

=Good. If human patterns are consistent, this will grant him many fish, and grant both him and us much mother's approval among humans.=

---

Jackson waded into the shallow end of the Cul de Sac pool with a padded harness in tow, which he worked over Three's front. 

Three was quiet for most of the process, only commenting if he felt the harness pinch or pull uncomfortably, until the camera was attached. "I am glad to carry your Away Eye for this. We are very glad to help. And you were worried about getting enough fish for your work
